---
layout: blank
title: RSA - Low-Brain Explain
excerpt: >

---
# RSA - Low-Brain Explain

<hr />

## History
It started with Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman. Around 1976, these two Stanford cryptography pioneers attempted to create a form of encryption based on shared-secret-key using created from prime numbers, modulus, and exponentiation. The pair stop after struggling to develop a sufficient one-way function, often attributed to the lack of exploration in the subject.

Cut to 1977 (okay, it's not really a cut). Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology try to create a sufficiently complex one-way function. They try many different methods and—in the interest of simplicity—it does not work. In April 1977, the three spend Passover at someone's home and drink lots of wine (apparently crucial to this story). Now hang on tight, there is a magic genius eureka moment ahead. Ron Rivest returns home and, instead of sleeping, cracks open a math textbook and starts working out the encryption function. He—I suppose in his drunken genius state of mind—spends the night formalizing and writing a paper on his function. Thus RSA encryption was born.

## Basic Operation
This is the mathematical basis of RSA encryption:

$$ (m^{e})^{d}≡m(mod\ n) $$

where:  
$$ m $$ is the message  
$$ e $$ , $$ d $$ , and $$ n $$ are large positive integers

$$ n $$ and $$ e $$ represents the public key
$$ d $$ (and $$ n $$ as required for decryption) represents the private key. More on public and private keys later.

In RSA, the idea is to find numbers for e, d, and n such that $$ (m^{e})^{d}≡m(mod\ n) $$ is valid and are large enough that given $$ e$$ , $$ n $$ , and $$ m $$ , $$ d $$ (private key) cannot be calculated.

## Key Generation
This part is complicated and has been reduced to the best of my abilities.

1. Choose two **distinct** prime numbers and designate them variables $$ p $$ and $$ q $$.
- $$ p $$ and $$ q $$ are kept secret.

2. Compute $$ n = pq $$ such that n is of the proper key length.
- $$ n $$ will be included in the public key.

3.  Calculate toitient Euler's or Carmichael's functions using $$ n $$.
- Either method yields equivalent results.
- $$ \varphi(n) = (p - 1)(q - 1) $$ for Euler's Toitient Function
- $$ \lambda(n) = \operatorname{lcm}(p - 1,q - 1) $$ for Carmichael's Toitient Function
- $$ \operatorname{lcm} $$ maybe calculated using the Euclidean Algorithm.
- $$ \text{toitient} $$ remains secret.

4. Calculate $$ e $$ where $$ \gcd(e, \text{totient})=1 $$ and $$ 1 < e < \text{toitient} $$.

5. Calculate $$ d $$ where $$ d ≡ e^{-1}mod(\text{toitient}) $$.
- $$ d $$ can be most efficiently solved using the Extended Euclidean Algorithm

Example:  
$$ p = 7 $$  
$$ q = 13 $$  
$$ n = pq = 91 $$  
$$ \varphi(n) = (p - 1)(q - 1) = 72 $$  
$$ e = \gcd(e, \varphi(n)) = 19 $$  
$$ d = e^{-1}mod(\varphi(n)) = 29 $$